Watsonx Orchestrate — Agent Builder Quick Guide (Short + Clean)
1. Log in and open Agent Builder

Sign in to your IBM watsonx Orchestrate environment.

From the left menu, select Build.

Click Agent Builder to view all agents.

2. Understand the main screens

Inside Agent Builder you’ll see:

Top navigation: shows where you are (breadcrumbs)

Left panel: navigation sections such as:

Overview / Profile — purpose and description of the agent

Knowledge — add documents and data sources

Tools — add actions and APIs

Configuration — behavior, guardrails, settings

Environments — Draft and Live control

Main workspace: where you design and edit the agent

3. Create a new agent

Click Create agent.

Pick either a Blank agent or a Template.

Enter a name and short description.

Save to open the agent workspace.

4. Define the agent profile

Go to the Overview / Profile tab.

Write:

Agent purpose

Example user prompts

Tone or persona (optional)

This guides the system to understand when and how the agent should help.

5. Add knowledge

Open the Knowledge or Data section.

Upload docs or link knowledge sources (PDF, DOCX, SharePoint, etc.).

Save to index the content.

Start with a few small files while testing.

6. Add tools

Open the Tools or Toolset section.

Select Add tool.

Choose:

A prebuilt tool

A custom tool built using OpenAPI or Tool Builder

Provide name, description, connections, and any inputs/outputs.

Save the tool.

7. Configure the agent behavior

Open the Configuration or Behavior section.

Select mode:

Agentic (LLM plans tool usage)

Deterministic (predefined workflows)

Enable the tools the agent is allowed to use.

Adjust guardrails and settings as needed.

Save.

8. Test in Draft mode

Use Chat Preview or Test.

Ask real user questions.

Review what tools the agent uses and how well it responds.

Fix and retest until responses are accurate.

9. Draft vs Live

Draft = design and testing

Live = the version available for users

Only publish to Live when you are confident in its behavior.

10. Deploy to Live

Open the Environments / Deploy section.

Select Promote to Live.

Confirm the deployment.

Users can now access the agent in chat or other channels.

11. Use from Orchestrate Chat

Open Orchestrate Chat.

Select the agent.

Request help using natural language.

12. Improve over time

Monitor performance and logs.

Return to Draft to improve:

Knowledge

Tools

Instructions

Re-deploy new versions when ready.
